time i'm really excited for this talk
this is uh one of my academic heroes and
somebody whose books have really
inspired me
over the past couple years coming up
next we have a presentation um
coming up next we have a presentation
from wendy chun
uh wendy hui
is simon fraser university's canada 150
research chair in new media and leads
the digital democracies institute she's
the author of several works including
discriminating data which is forthcoming
this year um
and more and three other books at mit
press including updating to remain the
same habitual new media program and
programmed vision software and memory
and finally my personal favorite control
and freedom power in the and paranoia in
the age of fiber optics this book was
really instrumental in all of the
framing of this festival um from the
really realist approach that she takes
to this dynamic between the possibility
and the limitation of new media
she has been professor and chair of the
department of modern culture and media
at brown university where she worked for
almost two decades and she has held
numerous visiting chairs and fellowships
from institutions such as harvard the
nnn the annenberg school at the
university of pennsylvania the institute
for advanced study at princeton the
guggenheim acls and american academy of
berlin she is also pi on several grants
including one from the uk canada ai
initiative and with that we're gonna
turn it over to wendy and hear more
about her latest work
hello everyone i'm very excited to be
here as part of the gray area festival
and to offer you a sneak preview of my
forthcoming book discriminating data
today i'm speaking to you from my home
in boston so i want to acknowledge that
i'm on the territory of the
massachusetts and their neighbors the
wampanoag and the nipmuck peoples and i
extend my respect to the citizens of
these nations who live here today and
their ancestors who have lived here for
over 500 generations
i also want to acknowledge that my
land acknowledgement like all others is
a small gesture
a small gesture that in canada at least
is part of an ongoing truth and
reconciliation process
a process however flawed and faltering
and believe me it is flawed and
faltering
to face the violent truths of settler
colonialism such as the horrific
residential school system
a process to move towards decolonization
reparations and reconciliation
a process of reconciliation that speaks
to some of the aims of this year's gray
area festival
to imagine new relational ontologies
beyond utopian and fatalistic world
views to prep to build practical
realities together to build planetary
scale cooperation and solutions that
move beyond technological
promises because relying on purely
technological promises is and has been
and will always be a dead end a dead end
in which anything is possible yet
nothing seems to change
and what i'll outline today is this
sense that anything is possible yet
nothing seems to change which the
festival organizers emphasize
isn't accidental
if nothing seems to change it's because
social media networks and predictive
programs
as they're currently formed and
implemented embed within themselves past
mistakes
past mistakes such as segregation
internment and eugenics and by doing so
they make it difficult to live and to
imagine different worlds
okay so to make this clear let's engage
in a collective thought experiment
so imagine or recall an image of a
mythic yet flawed past i'll supply a few
here's the so-called perfect white
suburban nuclear family
living in a segregated planned community
in which everything's the same
here are images
of u.s celebrities which are the
training set for many facial recognition
systems
and here are images of japanese american
children allegedly happily educated in
internment camps during world war ii
so imagine that this deep fake past has
become the only past
right so gone are images of civil rights
protests integrated schools and
cross-racial friendships
now imagine a world and nothing could
change from this deep faith past because
learning and truth
became repeating this deep fake past
got it
this is the nightmare scenario of
predictive machine learning
this is the world that we need to use
ariella azule's terms to unlearn
to unlearn not by ignoring history but
by engaging it differently and
potentially
because within these concepts and
defaults lie other worlds and
possibilities and helping us listen to
these other worlds as carrick healing
urges us to do is what drives
discriminating data
so most generally discriminating data
explores how data analytics and machine
learning create agitated clusters of
comforting rage
by encoding legacies of eugenics
segregation and discrimination
by taking on these issues discriminating
data is in dialogue with the many recent
books and articles written by kathy
o'neill sophia noble rooha benjamin
meredith broussard kate crawford
virginia eubanks and so many others
discriminating data does five basic
things the first is to expose and
investigate how ignoring differences
amplifies discrimination
so how ignoring race ignorantly promotes
racism
and every day we hear
about a new instance of what kathy
o'neill has called a weapon of mass
destruction
sophia noble has called algorithms of
oppression and rooha benjamin has called
the new gym code
from discriminatory predictive policing
and risk assessment programs to unfair
hiring programs and the classic example
of this which almost everybody mentions
is compass
compass is a software program used by
some u.s courts to predict the risk risk
of recidivism
so inmates and law enforcement fill out
a questionnaire encompass spits out a
score based on their answers and the
score is factored in
by some courts during sentencing and
parole
now the problem is that compass has been
shown to be biased against racial
minorities and here you see the cover of
the award-winning pro-publica article on
compass
now what researchers
pro-publica drew from were able to show
is that
although compass doesn't overtly use
racial categories doing so is illegal it
uses categories that are proxies for
race in the united states and here you
see an analysis produced by the marshall
project and here you see how race is
linked to factors such as education and
employment
now some have argued that these factors
aren't as important as others
that age and dirty data play a larger
role in these proxies
but this doesn't mean that compasses
predictions aren't racist if you
consider the over and under policing of
certain neighborhoods in the united
states and canada age at time of arrest
and dirty data you have to be in the
database in order to be described like
as well as education and employment
status are proxies for racism
if not race
and it's absolutely key that we think
through proxies for racism
crucially compass was initially sold as
solving the problem of racism by
eradicating individual human bias
as if racism was an individual human
bias problem
so we shouldn't be surprised that things
have turned out so poorly and rewriting
political and social problems as one's
technology can and should solve never
goes well
this hopeful ignorance isn't new and the
failures of this hopeful ignorance
aren't new these hopes and failures also
drive fears over the ai apocalypse
ai is so threatening because right now
ai and surveillance devices are sold as
modern-day servants or slaves
and this framing with all of its baggage
right
so what could go wrong in a society run
by servants or slaves
provokes fears of them as our masters
these fears and dreams are as genuine
has pointed out profoundly raced and
gendered and one thing i do in the book
is to address these two sides of hopeful
ignorance together because the best way
to avoid an ai apocalypse is to treat
everyone and everything with respect
to follow the kumbhi river collective's
call to treat everyone as levelly human
and to follow the indigenous protocols
call for us to make kin with our
machines
because freedom is only freedom if it's
freedom for all
and what we have to remember is that
these current anxieties over ai and
discriminatory algorithms can open up
opportunities for coalitions in
political action
civil rights and civil liberties groups
for instance came together to take on
facial recognition technology
the second thing discriminating data
does is to interrogate default
assumptions and axioms that ground
algorithms and data structures
so very briefly because it's impossible
to summarize five years of research into
20 minutes
in the book i map out how overblown
promises about correlation ties 21st
century data
analytics
to early
20th century
eugenics i also show how homophobically
the notion that similarity breeds
connection ties social networks to u.s
residential segregation so that echo
chambers aren't an accident they're a
goal in fact as i'll discuss a little
more later the very term homophily which
launders hate into love
comes from studies of post-world war ii
u.s residential segregation so
segregation here
is the ground truth and the goal of
these recommender systems
i also look how authenticity how
deviations and transgressions ground
training and transparency
so right now we're constantly called on
to be authentic by revealing some
intimate yet open secret about us
an open secret that makes us different
from some others
that makes us real
and these open secrets are valuable
because they're used to cluster us to
put us in network neighborhoods with
people like us who agitate and charge us
and one of my main points is that
networks magnetize and disintegrate
masses by divining and amplifying um
open secrets and then consolidating
these angry clusters of sameness around
a common enemy so that now we become
predictable not by following the
mainstream not by following norms but
rather by deviating slightly from the
norm with others
and lastly
discriminating data looks at how
recognition from facial recognition
technology to the radical rights embrace
of the politics of recognition builds on
discrimination
on a powerful and poisonous liberation
envy so that those who seek to deny
others their civil rights now
disidentify with and as civil rights
heroes
the third thing i do is try to grasp the
past present and future machine learning
puts in place by focusing on when why
and how their predictions work what's
key again is that in machine learning
truth equals consistency the future
equals the past
in other words learning is parsimonious
repetition
so the problem with machine learning as
it currently exists as it currently
exists isn't simply that it's often
trained on dirty or highly selective
data
again hollywood celebrities lie at the
heart of many facial recognition
technology training sets and here you
see so-called deep fakes produced using
this set
the problem isn't simply as this example
of hollywood stars as ground truth makes
clear that ground truth equals deep fake
but that the so-called predictive
programs are verified as true only if
they reproduce this data
so compass like all predictive machine
learning programs wasn't tested on its
ability to predict the future but rather
validated on its ability to predict the
past so past data that was hidden during
the training phase or out of um set data
so in these models
truth equals consistent repetition
and this matters because these programs
don't simply predict the future they
also determine the future
so risk assessments and software such as
compass cement and amplify inequalities
through their decisions
so that these programs these programs
are disruptive if they are not because
they make possible new unforeseen
futures but because they shut down the
future they make it repeat a deep fake
past by automating rather than learning
from past mistakes
okay
so if this is so
what can we do
well step four is to use existing ai
systems to diagnose current inequalities
to keep the future open to create a more
just and democratic future we need to be
a little perverse
we need to read the discriminatory
results of these algorithms against the
grain as evidence of past discrimination
amazon for example stopped using its
secret hiring
algorithm a few years ago because it was
shown to discriminate against women
apparently if you had women anywhere in
your cv like women's chess club you lost
points
but rather than simply discarding these
programs and they certainly should not
be used to determine hiring decisions
what if we use them as evidence right so
almost every amazon hiring decision
during a certain period was probably
used to train this program so what if we
thank them for meticulously documenting
their discrimination
what if we use these programs with all
their limitations as historical tools as
theoretical probes
in other words what if we treated them
like global climate change models so
global climate change models show us a
likely future based on the past not so
we'll accept that future but so will
change it
and global climate change models make
clear the difference between being true
and being correct
the point of a global climate change
model isn't validation it isn't to
determine how accurate any given
prediction is
the point rather is to act in such a way
that we don't have to
validate these predictions
so when a model um the point in other
words is not to produce this graph
and when a model we believe in
shows a two percent increase in mean
temperature we seek to fix the world not
the model
and this should be our reaction to
compass rather than trying to fix the
program we should try to fix the world
because what compass actually shows us
is how racism works through educational
and employment disparities
how racism is due to institutional
rather than individual bias right
compass did get rid of individual bias
yet racism remains
now the problem with global climate
change models of course is that we've
known
they're true for a very long time but
nothing's happened
which raises the question do we really
need more models for whom is global
climate change news
and more importantly how can we avoid
producing models that document the
obvious that document the obvious and
that serve as alibis for inaction
so step five the ultimate goal is to
create different worlds different
algorithms different relations that
engage the richness of relations and
knowledge unfolding around us
and to do so it takes up carrick
healing's call
to listen with others for the poetry the
refrains and the noise a world is making
and in the book i argue that not only
the problems but the outlines of a
solution can emerge from in there
not because technology can solve
societal problems but because technology
and society are always fused
together and because the past history as
azolai insists isn't lost
it isn't over it's the space of
potential if only we can unlearn our
exploitative relationship to the past
and engage with others not as sources
not as sources of information or sources
of data but rather as potential
companions
and so the book revisits and emphasizes
the populations that lie at the heart of
our networks and defaults residents of
addison terrace a biracial
housing project japanese internment
camps and married student housing and
mit civil rights activists slaves unruly
women workers at western electric
housewives and decatur and punishment
averse mice to name a few
okay
so what does this look like
well to return briefly to the article
and housing study that coined the term
homophily the columbia borough of
applied sociological research conducted
a study of two public housing projects
one was craft town a project that was
cooperatively owned of some 700
white
families in new jersey and it had to be
all white because it was cooperatively
owned and the laws around
the housing loans at that time
and hilltown a biracial low-rent project
of about 800 families in western
pennsylvania
now
the researchers didn't assume homophily
to be always true rather they asked when
does hemophilia or heterophilia happen
and they coined both these terms
homophily and heterophily
what they did find in the one article
they published is that status hormonally
wasn't generally true except for gender
and race and lazarus felt the merton
argued that value homophily the sharing
of values drove the status homophobially
to prove this they concentrated on the
over selection of white liberals and
white illiberals where liberals meant
believing in biracial housing and um
believing that the folks in hilltown got
along
ill liberals believe the opposites and
ambivalents didn't believe um in
biracial housing projects but admitted
that um people of both races got along
in the housing project they lived in
now to make this point to show that
values drove home awfully they actually
threw out the responses of black
residents
because they said there were too few
illiberal or and ambivalent black
residents with friends so in their
worldview values were racially bounded
in their subsequent analysis a model of
friendship formation they also ignored
the white ambivalence which was actually
the largest category of white residents
they never published the data for this
study
and if they did we would have seen that
the over selection of illiberals in real
numbers wasn't statistically significant
the report which was written by merton
patricia west and maria yehoda
also revealed that black and white
residents did have friends and
acquaintances of the other race in fact
this report was used as evidence for
desegregation
now again to come up with the term
homophily they ignored the responses of
the black residents but without these
black residents there would be no
clean lines of connection
so they lie within the white spaces that
make network connections possible they
lie in the gaps that make networks
possible
and the history of networks is filled
with sociological studies of others who
ground our concepts and make connection
possible even as they're made to
disappear
such as japanese americans who were
interned in camps during world war ii
and studying these attorneys was crucial
to the development of sentiment analysis
in particular um using sentiment
analysis
to deal with
captive communities
so these populations these connections
they're still there they inhabit
correlation homophily recognition and
authenticity
we live in their enclosed um in what
we're called
experimental spaces when we live in
social media and they reside with us and
touch us whenever we think with or
through these concepts
so the question before us is
how might we reside with them
how might we reside with them thank you
welcome back everybody i'm so thrilled
to be here joined by wendy hui chun and
barry through executive director at grey
area thank you guys both for for being
here today
um
this
presentation comes out of wendy's latest
book it's called discriminating data um
and so i'm super excited to to talk
about that with you i mean before we you
know talk too much about some of the
ideas that you presented i mean i still
need to like chew through this homophily
versus header awfully in my head a
little bit um but i
wanted to you know just start off by
getting some background on the book in
this research project and where it came
from um you know it clearly comes from a
longer lineage of your research practice
and you know other publications and so
i'd love to hear kind of the story of
you know how you got started on this on
this project
yeah so
this came right after um writing the
three books on the emergence of the
internet and what i started thinking
about with this book in particular was
um why and how polarization
and algorithmic defaults
were operating so very much how is it
that what i identified as habits earlier
or cultural norms get embedded within
certain algorithmic structures
and more importantly if if and when they
do what can they show us so we can then
change culture and society
so part of it was to say like why is it
that recommendation systems and social
media networks presume that similarity
breeds connection when it's so clear
around us that that there are so many
different types of relationships um how
did that happen how did that get
amplified and so part of it was reading
some of the foundational texts and
network science and digging through
footnotes and archives and just really
trying to understand why and how this
happened and then also to say um because
there's so much that has been written
and you know it started books started in
um what is it in night
when a lot of the the news about
discriminatory algorithms was coming out
and it became painfully clear that if
these algorithms were
discriminatory it wasn't because they
were
incorrect acting incorrectly but
actually because they were functioning
as they were supposed to
and so i tried to think through what
does that mean and if they are
functioning in the way they are what can
it reveal about our current state so
then we can intervene and imagine a
different role very much like global
climate change models let's treat these
as probability machines based on deep
things that will tell us what will
happen if we keep automating these deep
things
i mean it's
it's certain i mean it's it's
it's undeniable you know in terms of the
effect that it has in society and the
way that we're seeing uh people on
social networking platforms being
organized the way that you know you i
mean i i'm constantly the one mixed by
tick tock's algorithm because it's so
sophisticated
in creating
and playing both sides of this in a way
like it you know of creating showing you
things that are similar to something
that you watched or something that your
phone heard you say and then also giving
you kind of these random moments of
difference even though they're giving
those exact same moments to millions of
people around the world and kind of get
this illusion of a difference like the
illusion that you're getting something
that's outside of your sphere when it's
it's
in the context of recent whistleblowing
that's coming out of major uh social
media platforms you know this is these
are
things that
have been by human hand
seen witnessed promoted continued not
stopped
um and it's
i mean i want to say shocking but it
doesn't feel quite shocking anymore um
but it's it's horrifying nonetheless
yeah i mean one thing that was so
interesting about the whistleblower's um
testimony and this goes back to the
question of hemophilia similarity
is that a lot of people have justified
him awfully in terms of people want to
be around people who are like them it's
comfortable
but what's so clear is that if you put a
whole bunch of people who are like
together and you do this based on open
secrets or stigma what you'll have are
agitated clusters of comforting range i
mean that when they did put
limit to friends and families it got
worse and it makes sense
um and so trying to think through that
um and the different worlds that we live
in every day
is so key i also think that um what you
raised uh that's so important is to also
try to think through
when
is when
how does how do we as characters fit
into the scripts that we're given um
because i'm sure you know ben grosser's
work um and ben was trying to play with
the tick tock algorithm like going with
different identities etcetera etcetera
trying to get something different to
come out
and it was always the same
um and there's always there's an
interesting way in which with
personalization
often sometimes we think it becomes like
uh as matthew fuller was saying these
tarot cards that emerge right now we're
like oh that person it knew this about
me so that's why i chose this and so we
read into this some sort of deeper
understanding of ourselves then perhaps
is there like we close the circuit
between what's given and what we imagine
we like in order to make it
more and more powerful and personalized
that's interesting i don't know if you
saw that um
the end of this question is going to be
something about art and creativity but i
don't know if you saw the recent viral
video that was um
a woman who was
uh
using
the tick tock algorithm's
preference for motion and dance
to create an activist video so she was
saying things about you know
overthrowing capitalism and things like
that but dancing when she and it caused
the video to raise in the rankings when
she so there's a role for creativity
here and i'm wondering i'm sort of
reminded in so here's the question is i
was really sort of
struck by this idea of how technology is
really foreclosing futures
as opposed to necessarily opening you
know opening them up and one of the
things that we're kind of up to at gray
area and you can see in the festival
curation is the role that artists play
in
uh providing a counterbalance to that
so i'm wondering you're doing all this
great research i'm wondering in terms of
either dissemination or communication to
the public
um and i'm also reminded of like how
mcluhan contextualized uh
artists as like distant early warning
you know like culturally attuned and
sensorial people that are trained to
inoculate the public against this kind
of thing have you in in your
from what you see
how do you feel art plays a role in
dealing with all these things that we're
talking about here
i think art is central but i think that
not all artists are the same and i don't
think all art is the same either in in
doing this and i think there's a
tendency
i mean it's really interesting because
especially theorists we tend to end with
the artists that we think is really
amazing that we works things and we we
love
our covers are from them as well um and
then artists turn to the theorists they
love and then have them as the
framework for them and so i think
there's a really interesting
relationship there um but i think that
what what the most important art that's
being produced now does is precisely
make us
uh resonate with the worlds that exist
and the possibilities that exist not
simply in the future but now
um and i think that one thing that's
always been really key for me is to
reject both sides like so on one side
you know remember
time magazine
2000 you are the person of the year
you're the internet you know this is all
driven by you and then 2018
you know tech dude saying we destroyed
the internet we're sorry but we are the
internet right and you all are
marionettes um so i think that between
those um is is exactly where things lie
and um for me again what's key is that
we're characters which means that we
don't necessarily always write the
script but we're actors as well there's
ways in which the script that we have
because it's based on correlation means
that it's based on everybody's else's
actions so for me what's really profound
and this is what some of the best um new
media artists do is that they make us
realize that when we are looking at
these little tiny screens and we think
that it's just
me and the screen
there's an entire different
technological structure that's in place
and
that this entirely different
technological communication structure is
in place is actually a point of
possibility as well as a point of
intervention so i'm thinking of ben
grosser but also joanna mull's work um
mongols really early work
was quite brilliant in their rewriting
of the photoshop interface so in order
to
in order to alter
in order to alter an image you had to
change the class of the individual from
um
to middle class before you could apply
the filters and it was just a really
smart hack of the photoshop interface
but it made you think through class and
different ways of operating so i think
that that art has always been key but
also at the same time we can't imagine
that all art or artists are the same oh
yeah
and
i can tell you first hand they certainly
are not
i'm
pretty not sure about much but
um i'm glad you brought up ben grosser
just for the audience's awareness um ben
grosser currently has a solo show up at
our bike gallery in london um it's
really fabulous you can check it out
online our bite's a great uh arts and
tech gallery uh oh we'll drop the link
in the chat as well
um
we had we let off this festival with a
great conversation between ben bratton
and uh audrey tang
um and audrey said some really
interesting i wish we we could have that
conversation could have gone for four
hours actually it was fantastic but i'm
wondering um
audrey's position
is very
i mean uh
it's very open source centric you know
free culture open source
and i understand certainly the role of
open source and making the technology
behind things transparent
uh
that's clear but but it seems um
it's hard to think that that well i
guess what's the question do you feel
that that's a necessary but not
sufficient step
towards combating some of the you know
biases and technology that you're
talking about or how does it play you
know what what way do you think about
that in terms of potential responses
i think the most profound critiques of
open source that are sympathetic have
come from
indigenous data sovereignty folk
and as a lot of people have pointed out
the problem with the notion of open
source which is everything is freely
available is it's often been based on
taking other people's stuff
taking other people's genomes taking
other there's a certain colonialist
logic that's still embedded within the
notion that everything can be an open
source
um
and if you consider say
some of the work by someone like ariella
azulai who is trying to get us to think
through history not in terms of people
being sources but being companions
and if you think of the indigenous
protocol for artificial intelligence and
the focus on making kin with our
machines there's a profound difference
between viewing things and people
through the realm of open source
and viewing them through the realm of
companions
i mean that's so i mean that's so
pertinent and i think speaks to a lot of
the things also that
have been discussed over the course of
the festival related to
relationships to non-human beings or and
non-living beings um you know the
elements around us shape you know
something that i've been saying this is
the beginning of the festival is that
you know protocol
is everything gravity is a protocol you
know that's something that writes a
script that defines how we walk how we
move how we feel our bodies which is you
know our sensory perception to
everything
um and i really like your description of
people as characters uh you know and you
and and and and scripts uh being written
i mean i i and i think that this is so
you know i think a lot of people
you know
look at technology as being separate
from their life we hear a lot of the
duality between the irl and the url and
kind of everything in between and people
are like oh mark zuckerberg is doing
this you know whatever like that's not
part of my life but you know software
you know as not you know not to quote
the
the classic but you know software is a
layer that permeates all of society and
every aspect of our live experience is
now being framed and interfaced through
these kinds of constructions through
algorithmic environments
um and you know i'm wondering
how
what i mean i think that you know you
mentioned the the indigenous artificial
intelligence protocol um you know as
making kin with machines is one possible
way forward to escape from the
the tyranny of algorithmic control what
else you know what other strategies or
what ways can can people technologists
artists you know average citizens who
might feel like they don't have a role
in the script how can they play how can
they do something or engage in
in this conversation in a way that
perhaps
restores agency is that is that even
possible
yeah i mean that's such a huge question
i mean there's so many different ways
into it one is to understand that if the
profound effect that technology is
having on our our bodies and our on us
has everything to do with the fact that
humans are created so if you think of
things in terms of
technology's influence on us in terms of
our habits and our habitual way of being
habits are second nature habits point to
the fact that humans create another
nature and so to think through our
habits and the ways in which these
habits are central to
our negotiation and our embedding of
technology so even when we're not using
an interface
it's affected us like if we think even
how the notion of friending has changed
um profoundly whether on or offline or
how we conceive of our habitual way of
being i think that's how you get at some
of the ways in which technology has
affected us even when we're not
directly in front of our computers but i
think that because it is at the habitual
level that points to extreme human
creativity
that's central there there's a there's a
way in which this is
implies an embodiment in a relationship
and for me what's always key is to think
through again the ways in which
correlation is correlation so if your
computer is is operating right now it's
because it's downloading everybody
else's traffic and then not
and then actively deleting what's not
directly addressed to you the ways our
technologies and our connections operate
are by constantly opening us up to
others that are then closed by these
interfaces that we somehow accept as our
machines so i think part of it is to
think through the richness of connection
um and as a way in
to
understanding the kinds of agency and
the kinds of rules that we are already
playing
um and then to always realize that this
these things have been engineered a
certain way
that we can question
how things are are done we can think
through not just regulation
although regulation is certainly
important
not simply norms
but also and more importantly
a poetics of engagement and being in a
habit
of being with our technologies
you know
in
not just switch you know focus too much
but i think
part of this you know was we were
mentioning earlier about the deep fake
past and that resonated with a lot of
audience members um and and myself as
well i mean it's it's a metaphor that
is not even a metaphor it's just true
and i know you know i i was grateful for
that kind of you know framing because i
think it helps to understand you know
how
narratives have been told um we've been
talking a lot at the festival as well
about incorporating
ancestral knowledge incorporating
history and tradition into these
codified places um
in ways that
are meaningful and uphold them and then
by in turn by becoming a part of those
ecosystems changed them by their purely
by their presence um
and you know you you were talking a lot
in the presentation about the the the
relationship between the past and the
future
and i was wondering if you could expand
a little bit more on the ways that those
two things converge and what that means
for us as we kind of go forward in this
very uncertain uncertain time
yeah so right now what's most dangerous
about um these automatic systems is the
ways in which they can
because they're built on on things like
eugenic understandings of the future
they seek to make the future
simply repeat the past right truth is
consistent repetition the problem is
that the past they draw on is
fundamentally deep fake and that
repeating the deep faith becomes truth
um and part of what i'm trying to
understand is again if we view these as
mirrors like if we if we look at
something like compass and say
rather than let's fix the model so we
have a good
risk
assessment
unlocked
or whatever that would be
what if we use that as a mirror for
everything that's wrong with our current
justice system and then from there seek
to fix the world
not the model
there's a way in which the past that are
offered or and the futures that are
offered
um
give us ways to understand the gap
between what we want the future to look
like and what we need the future to look
like in order for it to be inhabitable
and where we're heading um given the
logics that were embedded in so i think
that again and this goes to the question
about agency um i think that the
question that we should ask about a lot
of these systems isn't simply let's fix
these technologies but how can we fix
the world and that gets to those
questions of the ancestral knowledge and
also different ways and modes of being
because if we focus simply on fixing
these technologies
then when are we fixed
um because a lot of times they're
working correctly
um and what they reveal is the ways in
which what's accepted as
the past is a deep fake
um and and they
show us the dangers of accepting that so
i do think that thinking through this as
a mirror and a point of intervention is
absolutely key to
to moving forward
hmm it's it's i i mean i love that i
think the the the use of the word mirror
is really key here you know we're
reflecting values of our society we're
reflective of our society um you
know and thinking about you know the way
that interfaces affect people i'm you
know that
it never fails it never escapes me that
we work on desktops with files and
folders in an extremely white white
collar
um work environment and that has deeply
permeated all of our subconsciousnesses
as you said on a very habitual habitual
level
i mean yeah
i would say that that's probably one of
the intervention points for art in this
is you know you have these medias that
are potentially correctly
revealing
biases inherent in our world or
injustices
and we have to keep
that
media that can
conditions and constructs our reality
from just amplifying those biases into
the world and so there needs to be some
intervention in the middle
of that and i think that's one of the
ways arts and culture can get in the
middle of that and
show how to because otherwise it would
just be a feedback loop that you have to
pop out of the system in some way or
another several years ago in 2017 we had
jean youngblood
at the festival and his and this is an
interesting question for you his his
conclusion ended up being
this idea that was secession from the
broadcast
and he was just like you got to get out
you know we have this homogeneous media
sphere and like you got to opt out
and then it's it's one of the big
dialogues that versus like no the only
way out is through you have to engage
with this stuff and deal with technology
and help and you know that's the that's
the path right
i don't know if you have a
thought do you
yeah how do you exit from this
conditioning sphere in a way that
besides reading you know reading
benjamin's book reading your book
reading
satya noble's book you know there's an
education portion but i don't know if
there's any way for someone that's
in the middle of this system
how do you trust the information that's
coming at you
when it could be reflecting just like
a truth or
you know
how do you trust it
well i think that first of all
we don't need to have the options of
opt-out or change and i think that
that's one thing we need to move away
from is if those were the the two um
especially because exit um if you think
about the people talking about exit
right now i mean it's uh
they're out there out yeah yeah
so i set up a i set up a dichotomy for
you to synthesize in the middle of
yeah i think that um what's key though
when you said how do you know what to
trust i mean what's interesting to me
right now is that a lot of people are
saying well the issue is you know people
aren't trusting the institutions that
they used to trust and this is why we're
in the problems we're in right and my
point is is always that democracy has
depended on people questioning um and
that the issue isn't that people are
questioning things the things are that
become dangerous is when mistrust of
something like cnn leads due to you to
completely trust epoch times like it's
not actually questioning that's the
issue it's where people land
um and i think that having this constant
question means so you don't land and
you're able to think through
alternatives
is absolutely key and i think here you
know things like global climate change
models again like they show us a future
not so that we'll accept it but so we'll
try to change it and i think that if we
look again with through this lens of a
probe on all these programs and say that
they show us what will be unless we
intervene and we need to intervene and
here i think again the ways in which
civil rights and civil liberties groups
have come together to intervene into
facial recognition technology shows us
the power
that can come from questioning these
results that become so
painfully clear when they're
algorithmically expressed so that people
who before didn't seem to care about
issues of racial discrimination now do
i think that this is a moment for
opportunity precisely because that gap
between prediction and reality will
always be there and that gap is always
the space for political and artistic
intervention
wow um
i mean
it's one thing that i think
looks like a roadblock to me
and that is an issue that i've never
totally been able to wiggle out from
is the opacity of all of it you know in
in in your books you talk about uh oh
sorry there's just a truck going past my
window um
so sorry about that but um
you know you for instance you mentioned
this earlier the way that information
pack data pocket switches
in our in our hardware that's a certain
protocol that as you as you said you
know brings out a lot it really opens us
up in ways that we're not even aware of
you know we can see the results of
racist algorithms and we can see the you
know we can see the the cultural impacts
of you know a white frame of
technological frame of mind you know
determining what these interfaces look
like but we can't understand how the
algorithm works it's almost too complex
to fully comprehend i mean and you know
the classic example is you know the
google search algorithm and you know no
single person knows how it works it's
been cobbled together and amended and
changed so many different times you know
i i've always i always have found you
know ethnographies of software companies
really rich in that sense because most
of them demonstrate that these teams are
so distributed that even you know at any
given time one person is only working on
one tiny piece and there's no
real grasp of the whole puzzle so even
for creators even for the builders the
writers of these scripts you know it's
very very difficult to fully see through
all of the different layers you know let
alone the casual internet user you know
and you know i think you know as media
theorists we're
a little bit more tuned in but you know
but even the average person who isn't
like critically thinking about this all
the time it's just a user um you know
for their life you know how how do we
overcome this opacity is that something
that
you see i don't know maybe it's not as
big of a problem as i
as i'm laying out but to me that's
something that i've grappled with a lot
i would say do we really need to
overcome the opacity um and what is at
stake in those in thinking through like
if we just knew exactly how these
technologies work then we could
intervene into them i mean we don't know
how many things in this world work right
i don't know you're opaque to me yet
we're having this conversation and i
believe that we're making interventions
into
each other um i think that other people
like
malek has really made the important
point that if we consider transparency
in relationship to these programs to be
in terms of understanding the machine is
what the machine is doing as opposed to
the relationship between the machine and
what it's supposed to represent
then we've lost the battle
and then there are other people like
cynthia rudin who are coming up with
explainable machine
learning models
that come up with many of the same
results of these more complicated ones
to or in order to understand how they
operate and that's key as well but i you
know i think research is right opacity
is central to
relationship and relationality and why
is it that we believe our machine should
be transparent to us like what is it
about that relationship that we
fundamentally believe that these
machines should be transparent when we
don't expect that from the rest of the
world and if we
can understand that maybe
opacity isn't what's causing domination
and discrimination but there's actually
something that's completely obvious
that's causing discrimination and
domination
i wonder sometimes when the the
discussion around transparency becomes
an alibi for us not to deal with these
other things because we're focused on
this thing as if if we only knew this
then we could intervene and i also think
that people overplay what we don't know
i mean
a lot of these tools they're not rocket
science a lot of these basic
mathematical concepts are well known
they're used in different ways but it's
the same way you know people used to say
about people said global climate change
is going to happen
a hundred
hundreds of years ago based on just how
hot house gases operate um it didn't
take all these models it was a
fundamental formula
that could
predict this not in all its
particularities but the fundamental
trend and so i wonder
why it is that we we let ourselves um
think that because we don't know this
and we get islamists by the fact that we
don't know this that somehow this means
that it we don't act
it seems like even rocket science isn't
rocket science anymore okay
anybody can get in the game these days
you know that's a really that's a really
refreshing approach uh wendy and it
gives me a lot of hope it makes me feel
a lot better about something that has
given me you know that i've been you
know wrestling with for for a while um
and i mean it's it's you know
to use a very you know somewhat recent
example i'm just reminded of it's
interesting in contrast with what
social media companies what technology
platforms attempt to
sell to you transparency right like you
have this online profile you have this
verified identity now we're getting into
the crypto space where blockchains
verify every transaction that make it
immutable and clear
um and it's just i just find that to be
such an interesting tension because as
we saw in things like you know dave
eggers the circle for instance you know
what
what this idea of radical transparency
can actually
generate which is ultimately deeply
damaging um in so many different ways uh
so that's exactly oh it's totally it's
like the demand for real names is
somehow going to make bullying go away
as opposed to realizing that actually
real names makes bullying a lot more
effective
yeah yeah
totally absolutely
um we're generally i'm looking at the
clock here
yeah we're just about at it we're a
little bit over time um
but you know i could talk to you for six
hours wendy and you know i i really
appreciate you sharing some insights
from your new book uh it's not quite out
yet do you have a release date uh um so
i just got my author copy so it's right
here um it's i think it's coming out
november
um second or fifth
saturday
and what's the publisher
um mit mit press
so
yeah grab a copy guys i can't even tell
you now before it's gone
if i as soon as i get a discount code
i'm gonna send it to everyone
well thank you for inviting me this is
such a great so much i wish i could
thank you so much for being here wendy
um you know i couldn't think about i
couldn't do a festival about protocol
without inviting you it would just feel
so wrong
so thank you so so much for being here
we really appreciate your your
inspiration
thank you
see you and good luck with everything
yeah thank you